# CWE/SANS Top 25 - 2024

This [CWE/SANS Top 25](https://cwe.mitre.org/top25/archive/2024/2024_cwe_top25.html) 
list demonstrates the currently most common and impactful software weaknesses. 
Often easy to find and exploit, these can lead to exploitable vulnerabilities 
that allow adversaries to completely take over a system, steal data, or prevent 
applications from working.

1. **Improper Neutralization of Input During Web Page Generation (Cross-site Scripting)**\
    The software does not neutralize or incorrectly neutralizes user-controllable 
    input before it is placed in output that is used as a web page that is served 
    to other users.

2. **Out-of-bounds Write**\
    The software writes data past the end, or before the beginning, of the 
    intended buffer.

3. **Improper Neutralization of Special Elements used in an SQL Command (SQL Injection)**\
    The software constructs all or part of an SQL command using externally-influenced 
    input from an upstream component, but it does not neutralize or incorrectly 
    neutralizes special elements that could modify the intended SQL command when 
    it is sent to a downstream component.

4. **Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF)**\
    The web application does not, or can not, sufficiently verify whether a 
    well-formed, valid, consistent request was intentionally provided by the user 
    who submitted the request.

5. **Improper Limitation of a Pathname to a Restricted Directory (Path Traversal)**\
    The software uses external input to construct a pathname that is intended to 
    identify a file or directory that is located underneath a restricted parent 
    directory, but the software does not properly neutralize special elements within 
    the pathname that can cause the pathname to resolve to a location that is 
    outside of the restricted directory.

6. **Out-of-bounds Read**\
    The software reads data past the end, or before the beginning, of the intended 
    buffer.

7. **Improper Neutralization of Special Elements used in an OS Command (OS Command Injection)**\
    The software constructs all or part of an OS command using externally-influenced 
    input from an upstream component, but it does not neutralize or incorrectly 
    neutralizes special elements that could modify the intended OS command when 
    it is sent to a downstream component.

8. **Use After Free**\
    Referencing memory after it has been freed can cause a program to crash, use 
    unexpected values, or execute code.

9. **Missing Authorization**\
    The software does not perform an authorization check when an actor attempts 
    to access a resource or perform an action.

10. **Unrestricted Upload of File with Dangerous Type**\
    The software allows the attacker to upload or transfer files of dangerous 
    types that can be automatically processed within the product's environment.

11. **Improper Control of Generation of Code (Code Injection)**\
    The software constructs all or part of a code segment using externally-
    influenced input from an upstream component, but it does not neutralize 
    or incorrectly neutralizes special elements that could modify the syntax 
    or behavior of the intended code segment.

12. **Improper Input Validation**\
    The product receives input or data, but it does not validate or incorrectly 
    validates that the input has the properties that are required to process 
    the data safely and correctly.

13. **Improper Neutralization of Special Elements used in a Command (Command Injection)**\
    The software constructs all or part of a command using externally-influenced 
    input from an upstream component, but it does not neutralize or incorrectly 
    neutralizes special elements that could modify the intended command when it 
    is sent to a downstream component.

14. **Improper Authentication**\
    When an actor claims to have a given identity, the software does not prove 
    or insufficiently proves that the claim is correct.

15. **Improper Privilege Management**\
    The product does not properly assign, modify, track, or check privileges 
    for an actor, creating an unintended sphere of control for that actor.

16. **Deserialization of Untrusted Data**\
    The application deserializes untrusted data without sufficiently verifying 
    that the resulting data will be valid.

17. **Exposure of Sensitive Information to an Unauthorized Actor**\
    The product exposes sensitive information to an actor that is not explicitly 
    authorized to have access to that information.

18. **Incorrect Authorization**\
    The product performs an authorization check when an actor attempts to access 
    a resource or perform an action, but it does not correctly perform the check.

19. **Server-Side Request Forgery (SSRF)**\
    The web server receives a URL or similar request from an upstream component 
    and retrieves the contents of this URL, but it does not sufficiently ensure 
    that the request is being sent to the expected destination.

20. **Improper Restriction of Operations within the Bounds of a Memory Buffer**\
    The software performs operations on a memory buffer, but it can read from 
    or write to a memory location that is outside of the intended boundary of 
    the buffer.

21. **NULL Pointer Dereference**\
    A NULL pointer dereference occurs when the application dereferences a 
    pointer that it expects to be valid, but is NULL, typically causing a 
    crash or exit.

22. **Use of Hard-coded Credentials**\
    The software contains hard-coded credentials, such as a password or 
    cryptographic key, which it uses for its own inbound authentication, 
    outbound communication to external components, or encryption of internal 
    data.

23. **Integer Overflow or Wraparound**\
    The software performs a calculation that can produce an integer overflow 
    or wraparound, when the logic assumes that the resulting value will always 
    be larger than the original value. 
    This can introduce other weaknesses when the calculation is used for 
    resource management or execution control.

24. **Uncontrolled Resource Consumption**\
    The software does not properly control the allocation and maintenance of 
    a limited resource, thereby enabling an actor to influence the amount of 
    resources consumed, eventually leading to the exhaustion of available 
    resources.

25. **Missing Authentication for Critical Function**\
    The product does not perform any authentication for functionality that 
    requires a provable user identity or consumes a significant amount of 
    resources.


## References

* [2024 CWE Top 25 Most Dangerous Software Weaknesses](https://cwe.mitre.org/top25/archive/2024/2024_cwe_top25.html)

*Egon Teiniker, 2019-2025, GPL v3.0*	